option: reduce default number for TCP CT max entries (#10289)
cilium-team/cilium: Documentation/install/upgrade.rst

  .. note:: The ENI IPAM mode automatically derives the native routing CIDR so
            no action is required.

Upgrading from >=1.7.0 to 1.8.y
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> #. Since Cilium 1.5, the conntrack table size ``ct-global-max-entries-tcp``

Reviewer: This is tricky to get right. In general, we are providing instructions to users with the Helm options since v1.6, so the option here may be confusing because if someone applies it in Helm. For example, `--set ct-global...` it will have no effect.

I would suggest that instead we have a two-phase process:

1. Identify whether any action is necessary on the user's part. This could be either getting the logs from Cilium startup and checking the value (unreliable for long-running instances) or maybe using something like `bpftool` inside a cilium container to identify what the current size of the map is. We can likely streamline this to a 1-liner.
1. If (and only if) the value is non-standard, provide the helm options necessary to ensure that the `helm template` / `helm install` commands will generate the correct configuration for these settings.

Reviewer: One other caveat here -- I didn't trace through the various install instructions but what subset of users will be affected here? I think we can safely say that:
* Users who installed v1.5, v1.6 or v1.7 on a fresh cluster and subsequently upgrade will not be affected unless they have explicitly configured these options in the past.
* Users who upgrade to newer Cilium versions while retaining their old ConfigMap (option B [here](https://docs.cilium.io/en/v1.7/install/upgrade/#step-2-option-b-preserve-configmap) *may* be affected (but it would depend on the initial version of Cilium used and the YAMLs provided with that version, and whether the user has made any manual changes to the ConfigMap since then..).

I would encourage you to investigate these statements and disagree if you find evidence that they're untrue.

The importance of this is that we can frame the documentation in such a way that we can potentially simplify the upgrade process for a plurality of users. Two focuses: (1) as a user, how much do you care about hitless upgrade / connection interruption (if you don't care, ignore these instructions) ; (2) how can a user know easily that they must take action (if you care, do you need to do something).

Author: Thanks a lot for the feedback @joestringer 

re. your 1st reply: I added the corresponding instructions to determine the current map size (using the `bpf-map` tool, as `bpftool` didn't seem to work for me on 4.9 kernel). Also added the instructions to set the helm options.

re. your 2nd reply: I traced through the install and upgrade instructions and as far as I can see, your statements given above are all true. But to be honest I'm not yet that familiar with helm and ConfigMap, so I might have missed some subtle detail.

> The importance of this is that we can frame the documentation in such a way that we can potentially simplify the upgrade process for a plurality of users. Two focuses: (1) as a user, how much do you care about hitless upgrade / connection interruption (if you don't care, ignore these instructions) ; (2) how can a user know easily that they must take action (if you care, do you need to do something).

Completely agree. I think having the instructions with the check for the currently configured map size should help in that regard. Maybe it can be fleshed out a bit more to be more concise. Feedback welcome.

Reviewer 2: @joestringer waiting for an ack on your side before I merge this <message from janitor hat>

   parameter was set to the default value ``1000000`` to retain backwards
   compatibility with previous versions. In Cilium 1.8 the default value is
   set to 512K by default in order to reduce the agent memory consumption. This
   means at maximum 512K connections across all endpoints (split by protocol,

>    tcp or other) are supported by default. To prevent from breaking established

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   means at maximum 512K concurrent TCP connections across all endpoints are supported by default. To prevent from breaking established...
```

Reviewer: (note that in the code, TCP CT table is separate from non-TCP CT table so the limits are different).

Author: Good point. ~I completely forgot to mention `bpf-nat-global-max` which is also reduced by this PR. Will adjust the docs as you suggest and also add a similar note about `bpf-nat-global-max`.~ (sorry, got confused about `bpf-nat-global-max`, it's derived from `bpf-ct-global-tcp-max`, so probably no need to mention it explicitly)

  .. note:: The ENI IPAM mode automatically derives the native routing CIDR so
            no action is required.

Upgrading from >=1.7.0 to 1.8.y
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

#. Since Cilium 1.5, the conntrack table size parameter
   ``bpf-ct-global-tcp-max`` was set to the default value ``1000000`` to retain
   backwards compatibility with previous versions. In Cilium 1.8 the default
   value is set to 512K by default in order to reduce the agent memory
   consumption. This means at maximum 512K concurrent TCP connections across all
   endpoints are supported by default. To prevent from breaking established
   connections, ``bpf-ct-global-tcp-max`` must be manually set to

>    ``1000000`` (or any other sufficiently large value) before upgrading.

Reviewer: This sentence is misleading, in particular because it puts doubt on which value may cause connection breakage. To be clear, if any value for these settings is used that is not the same as the currently configured values, then there will be connection breakage.

I think it's also worth stating the impact: Connection breakage means that ongoing connections will be disrupted. Tolerant applications will reconnect after a blip. Less tolerant applications may require restarting to re-establish connectivity.

The paragraph that declares the impact should probably be separate from the other paragraphs; that way, if a user scans across the different paragraphs, they should be able to quickly identify that this is the paragraph stating the impact. They can make a judgement call whether they care in this case (and for that matter, get a hint what to do if things break during the upgrade).

Author: Ok, my understanding was that only downsizing the map would cause connection breakage. I've now adjusted the section to state that any map size change will cause disrupted connections and also moved this statement into its own paragraph.

Reviewer 3: `This means at maximum 512K concurrent TCP connections across all endpoints are supported by default.` This statement is actually not correct. There's a lot more added to the CT table, e.g. related entries, service entries, etc. So in the worse case in case of BPF NodePort when the backend is local, this means max 128k service connections. :-(

Author: @borkmann TIL, thanks for clarifying. Do you think it's ok if I just remove this sentence? I think it would probably be too much detail in the upgrade guide to document the max. number of connections for all the cases.

Reviewer 3: Yes, I would remove it. Doesn't our helm deployment have a 512k CT table size for TCP anyway? Should there be any mentioned of this in the upgrade doc?

Author: Yes, the helm deployment already has this number. I think the main concern is about users who changed the default value or aren't using helm deployment.

Reviewer 3: Right, should this be better clarified in the upgrade guide?

Author: Agree, I'll rephrase the section to make it clearer.

   To check whether any action is required the following command can be used to
   check the currently configured maximum number of entries:

   .. code:: bash

>       sudo bpf-map info /sys/fs/bpf/tc/globals/cilium_ct4_global | grep "Max entries:"

Reviewer: FWIW if we wanted to avoid `bpf-map` we could just check the headers we use to compile the datapath:
```
# grep -R CT_MAP_SIZE_TCP /var/run/cilium/state/templates/
/var/run/cilium/state/templates/942ab6c4186d8b5f243c0f6fa59341122f671be1/lxc_config.h:#define CT_MAP_SIZE_TCP 524288
```

Reviewer: I'm not sure how to tell the equivalent for the NAT table size since I didn't have an instance with BPF nodeport lying around to test. Probably `SNAT_MAPPING_IPV4_SIZE`?

Author: > FWIW if we wanted to avoid `bpf-map` we could just check the headers we use to compile the datapath:
> 
> ```
> # grep -R CT_MAP_SIZE_TCP /var/run/cilium/state/templates/
> /var/run/cilium/state/templates/942ab6c4186d8b5f243c0f6fa59341122f671be1/lxc_config.h:#define CT_MAP_SIZE_TCP 524288
> ```

Good point, using that command instead.

Author: > I'm not sure how to tell the equivalent for the NAT table size since I didn't have an instance with BPF nodeport lying around to test. Probably `SNAT_MAPPING_IPV4_SIZE`?

Yes, looks like it's `SNAT_MAPPING_IPV4_SIZE` and/or `SNAT_MAPPING_IPV6_SIZE` depending on IPv4/IPv6 being enabled/disabled. Not checked on an actual instance though, but by checking the sources.

Author: Will add the corresponding `grep` command as well, if we decide to change the value of `bpf-nat-global-max`, see https://github.com/cilium/cilium/pull/10289#discussion_r389550453

>    If the maximum number is 524288 or below, no action is required. If the

Reviewer: "or below" here is misleading in the same way as above; if the value is not the _same_ as the new configuration, then connectivity breakage will occur.

Reviewer: Conversely... if the user previously configured the value to be something else, then they should hold on to their existing settings. Changing to 524288 or below will cause the same problem.

  .. note:: The ENI IPAM mode automatically derives the native routing CIDR so
            no action is required.

Upgrading from >=1.7.0 to 1.8.y
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

#. Since Cilium 1.5, the conntrack table size parameter

>    ``bpf-ct-global-tcp-max`` was set to the default value ``1000000`` to retain

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
   ``bpf-ct-global-tcp-max`` in the daemon was set to the default value ``1000000`` to retain
```

   backwards compatibility with previous versions. In Cilium 1.8 the default
   value is set to 512K by default in order to reduce the agent memory
   consumption.

   If Cilium was deployed using Helm, the new default value of 512K was already

>    effective in Cilium 1.7, unless it was manually configured to a different

Reviewer: I think that the below should be accurate:
```suggestion
   effective in Cilium 1.6 or later, unless it was manually configured to a different
```

https://github.com/cilium/cilium/blob/215b0a49800e912d3cdeb70eb18e5bd42d6734fc/install/kubernetes/cilium/values.yaml#L191

   If the maximum number is 524288, no action is required. If the number is
   different, ``bpf-ct-global-tcp-max`` needs to be adjusted in the `ConfigMap`
   to the value shown by the command above (100000 in the example below):

.. tabs::
  .. group-tab:: kubectl

    .. parsed-literal::

      helm template cilium \\
      --namespace=kube-system \\
      ...
      --set global.bpf.ctTcpMax=100000
      ...
      > cilium.yaml
      kubectl apply -f cilium.yaml

  .. group-tab:: Helm

    .. parsed-literal::

      helm upgrade cilium --namespace=kube-system \\
      --set global.bpf.ctTcpMax=100000

#. The default value for the NAT table size parameter ``bpf-nat-global-max`` in
   the daemon is derived from the default value of the conntrack table size
   parameter ``bpf-ct-global-tcp-max``. Since the latter was changed (see
   above), the default NAT table size decreased from ~820K to 512K.

   TODO(tk): document consequences

   To check whether any action is required the following command can be used to
   check the currently configured maximum number of entries:

   .. code:: bash

      sudo grep -R SNAT_MAPPING_IPV[46]_SIZE /var/run/cilium/state/templates/

>    If the maximum number is 524288, no action is required. If the number is

Reviewer: By the way, I think that if the feature is not enabled, the above grep will output nothing; in that case the user should be safe to to nothing.

Author: Agree. Already had this in my local changes but I seem to have pushed an intermediate version. Will still need to verify consequences for NAT table upgrade and will push once it's all documented.
